* Translating the Emacs manuals

** Copyright assignment

People who contribute translated documents should provide a copyright
assignment to the Free Software Foundation.  See the "Copyright
Assignment" section in the Emacs manual.


** Translated documents license

The translated documents are distributed under the same license as the
original documents: the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.

See https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.html for more information.

If you have any questions regarding the use of the FDL license in your
translation work that do not appear in the FAQ, feel free to contact the
GNU project.

See https://www.gnu.org/contact/ for more information.

** Location of the translated files

*** Texinfo source files

The source files of the translated manuals are located in the
doc/translations directory, under the sub-directory corresponding to the
translated language.

  E.g., French manual sources are found under doc/translations/fr.

The structure of each language's folder should match that of the English
manuals (i.e. include misc, man, lispref, lispintro, emacs).

*** Built files

Translated deliverables in Info format are built at release time and are
made available for local installation.


** Source files format

The manuals and their translations are written in the Texinfo format
(with the exception of the org-mode manual, which is written in Org, and
illustrations for the Introduction to Emacs Lisp Programming, which are
EPS files).

See https://www.gnu.org/software/Texinfo/ for more information.

You must install the Texinfo package in order to verify the translated
files, and refer to the Texinfo manual for information on the various
Texinfo features.

Emacs has a Texinfo mode that highlights the parts of the Texinfo code
to be translated for easy reference.


*** Texinfo specific issues

Until the Emacs/Texinfo projects provide better solutions, here are a
few rules to follow:

- Under each @node, add an @anchor that has the same content as the
  original English @node.

- Translate the @node content but leave the @anchor in English.

- Most Emacs manuals are set to include the docstyle.Texi file.  This
  file adds the "@documentencoding UTF-8" directive to the targeted
  manual. There is no need to add this directive in a manual that
  includes docstyle.texi.

- Add a @documentlanguage directive that includes your language.

  E.g., @documentlanguage zh

This directive currently has little effect but will be useful in the
future.

- The @author directive can be used for the translator's name.

  E.g., @author traduit en fran√ßais par Achile Talon


** Fixing the original document

During the course of the translation, you might encounter passages in
the original document that need to be updated or otherwise corrected, or
even run into a bug in Emacs.  If you cannot immediately correct the
problem, please file a bug report promptly.

See the 'Bugs' section in the Emacs manual.

** Sending your contributions

Send your contributions (files or revisions) for review to the Emacs
development list at emacs-devel@gnu.org. Subscribing to the list is not
obligatory.

Always send contributions in the format of the original document.  Most
of the content in the Emacs manuals is in Texinfo format, so please do
not send contributions in derivative formats (e.g. info, html, docbook,
plain text, etc.)

Before sending files for review, please ensure that they have been
thoroughly checked for spelling/grammar/typography by at least using the
tools provided by Emacs.

Please also make sure that the Texinfo files build properly on your
system.

Send your contributions as patches (git diff -p --stat), and prefer the
git format-patch form, since that format allows for easier review and
easier installation of the changes by the persons with write access to
the repository.

The Emacs project has a lot of coding, documentation and commenting
conventions.  Sending such patches allows the project managers to make
sure that the contributions comply with the various conventions.


** Discussing translation issues

Translation-related discussions are welcome on the emacs development
list.  Discussions specific to your language do not have to be in
English.


** Translation teams

The number of words in the Emacs manuals is over 2,000,000 words and
growing.  While one individual could theoretically translate all the
files, it is more practical to work in language teams.

If you have a small group of translators willing to help, please make
sure that the files are properly reviewed before sending them to the
Emacs development list (see above).

Please refer to the translation-related documents maintained by the GNU
Project, and contact your language translation team to learn the
practices they have developed over the years.

See https://www.gnu.org/server/standards/README.translations.html for
more information.


** Translation processes

Emacs does not yet provide tools that significantly help the translation
process.  A few useful functions would be:

- automatic lookup of a list of glossary items when starting to work on
  a translation "unit" (paragraph or otherwise); such glossary terms
  should be easily insertable at point,

- automatic lookup of past translations to check for similarity and
  improve homogeneity over the whole document set; such past translation
  matches should be easily insertable at point, etc.


*** Using the PO format as an intermediate translation format

Although the PO format has not been developed with documentation in
mind, it is well-known among free software translation teams, and you
can easily use the po4a utility to convert Texinfo to PO for work in
translation tools that support the PO format.

See https://po4a.org for more information.

However, regardless of the intermediate file format that you might use,
you should only send files in the original format (Texinfo, org-mode,
eps) for review and installation.


*** Free tools that you can use in your processes

A number of free software tools are available outside the Emacs project,
to help translators (both amateur and professional) in the translation
process.

If they have any features that you think Emacs should implement, you are
welcome to provide patches to the Emacs project.

Such tools include:

- the GNOME Translation Editor, https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Gtranslator/
- KDE's Lokalize, https://apps.kde.org/lokalize/
- OmegaT, https://omegat.org
- the Okapi Framework, https://www.okapiframework.org
- pootle, https://pootle.translatehouse.org

etc.


* License of this document

Copyright (C) 2024-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification, are
permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice
and this notice are preserved.  This file is offered as-is, without any
warranty.


Local Variables:
mode: outline
paragraph-separate: "[  ]*$"
coding: utf-8
End:
